As capitalist economies emerge from business- cycle recessions, capital outlays by capitalist terms pick up. With the growth in capital outlays comes the growth in the demand for labor power. If the pace of capital outlays and capital accumulation remains high for several years, the labor market starts tightening and the reserve army of labor— what Marx calls the relative surplus population— starts depleting. As the reserve army becomes smaller, the bargaining power of workers increases, reflecting the decline in the “cost of job loss”: if a worker is laid off, he or she can find alternative employment relatively easily. The increase in the bargaining power of workers translates into higher real wages. If there are constraints of the ability of firms to raise prices (due, for instance, to international competition), the growth rate of real wages might outpace the growth rate of labor productivity, leading to a squeeze on profits. The fall in the rate of profits chokes off capital outlays, setting of a crisis. 

While theorists who used, or still use, the profit squeeze mechanism for explaining capitalist crisis did not pay much attention to the possible effect of the fall in the rate of exploitation on the organic composition of capital, doing so will only strengthen the argument. If the rate of exploitation falls, capitalist firms will have a strong incentive to replace workers with machines. If successful, that will increase the organic composition of capital. Using (3), we can see that the rise in the organic composition of capital, as a response to the fall in the rate of exploitation, will depress the rate of profits further and might lead to a deeper crisis.