In a situation of excess surplus value, the financial system comes under severe strain (Foley 2012). Uis is because the ability of the financial system to channelize surplus value into expenditure streams for the purchase of newly produced goods and services gets eroded. Why? In a situation of excess surplus value, the financial system is flush with funds, so that interest rates are low. This encourages speculative activity with borrowed funds, directed at purchasing key assets like land, or shares of stock, rather than produced goods and services. For some time, which can even range over many years, the speculative activity becomes self- fulfilling. Economic agents use borrowed funds to purchase assets with the aim of making capital gains. If this activity is undertaken by a large fraction of the relevant set of economic agents, the demand for the asset rises and leads to a rise in its price. Thus, the initial expectations of the speculators are fulfilled, and it draws in more funds into the speculative activity. Thus, the speculative activity both feeds on and supports a bubble in the price of the relevant asset. 

There are two effects of the speculation- driven asset price bubble. First, it leads to a “wealth effect” that boosts debt-financed expenditures. Since the price of the relevant asset increases rapidly, owners of that asset feel wealthy. Hence, they use that asset as collateral to borrow and spend. This boost to spending allows capitalist firms to sell commodities and make profits. In effect, the problem of aggregate demand that plagues a capitalist economy generating excess surplus value is solved temporarily. Second, it increases the financial fragility of the system because the share of debt financed expenditures in the economy increases. Speculative activity that aims to make capital gains is largely Tnanced with borrowed funds. Moreover, the debt-financed expenditures on commodities also, most obviously, rely on borrowed funds. Thus, the overall result is an increase in the share of debt-financed expenditures 

Asset price bubbles inevitably deflate, open triggered by some event in the larger economy. As expectations turn sour, speculators leave the asset in droves, driving down its price. This brings to the fore a long and complicated chain of payment commitments that cannot be met— because they were based on expectations of higher, or even increasing, price of the asset. Payment failures cascade through the system, roiling balance sheets and ushering in a full- blown financial crisis. The crisis in the financial system manifests itself in outright reduction of volumes of credit, increases in the cost of credit, deleveraging by economic agents to repair balance sheets, fire sale of assets, and other related phenomena. All these processes lead to drastic falls in expenditures, reductions in aggregate demand and could eventually push the economy toward an economic crisis.