For Marx, capitalism was an inherently crisis- prone system of social production. In his account, crises emerged from within the very logic of capitalism and were a manifestation of the inherent contradictions of the system. Using modern parlance, we can say that Marx conceived crisis as being endogenously generated by the functioning of capitalist systems. From this line of thinking comes the important conclusion that capitalism cannot exist without crises. **The corollary is that any theory of the dynamics of capitalism must incorporate a theory of crisis as one of its integral components.**

**Marx theory of crisis as an endogenous phenomena**

In adopting this viewpoint, Marx not only differed sharply from later- day neoclassical economists but also from major political economists of his time, including David Ricardo, who thought of crises as accidental phenomena, not related to the essential logic of capitalism. In modern parlance, Ricardo could probably be paraphrased as asserting that economic crises in capitalism were caused by exogenous factors. Developing the logic of the endogenous conceptualization of crisis, and implicitly contrasting it with the diametrically opposed viewpoint that understands crisis as caused by exogenous factors, provides a good entry point into Marxist analyses of capitalist crisis. But before we take that up, a small detour is in order. 

**Argument on the scattered aspects of crisis theory**

To the extent we know on the basis of the extant literature, Marx did not leave behind a systematic analysis of capitalist crisis. While Marx (and Engels) referred to the phenomenon of capitalist crisis as early on in their political life as 1848 (in the Communist Manifesto), his comments on the topic are mostly fragmentary. In fact, they are not even collected together in one work but are instead scattered in various places in multiple texts. Many of these texts were not published during his lifetime like the Notebooks of 1857- 58 (the Grundrisse), the Theories of Surplus Value (written between 1861 and 1863) and Volumes II and III of Capital (written between 1863 and 1865). Hence, it seems clear that Marx never got the chance to return to these texts and fully work out his ideas on capitalist crisis.

**Marx theory of crisis operate at an abstract level for Deepankar**

Even though Marx’s writings on capitalist crisis are incomplete and scattered, they can still be a source of important insights if approached with care. The key point to keep in mind when engaging with Marx’s writings on capitalist crisis is that one can have a theory of capitalist crisis at two very diqerent levels of abstraction. On the one hand, there can be a general theory of capitalist crisis at a high level of abstraction. Such a theory tries to demonstrate, using political- economic reasoning, why crisis is built into the very logic of capitalism and why capitalism cannot be conceived without at the same time thinking about crisis. On the other hand, there can be theories of capitalist crisis at lower levels of abstraction. Such theories delineate specific economic mechanisms that can push a capitalist economy toward a crisis in a particular situation.

**Here he is totally right** 

_Proponents of each of these theories have, then, spent inordinate amounts of time and energy in arguing why other theories are wrong or un-Marxian. One important task of this chapter is to show that most of these controversies are unnecessary. A synthesis of Marxist theories of crisis can accommodate each of the important strands within one unified framework._


